WEBSYS – Elective 3: Web Systems and Technologies
WEBSYS (Web Systems and Technologies) is a comprehensive course focused on the design, development, and deployment of dynamic and responsive web applications. It explores both client-side and server-side web technologies, database integration, RESTful APIs, and modern frameworks. The course encourages students to build full-stack applications while following best practices in usability, accessibility, security, and performance optimization.
Fundamentals of Web Systems
 1. Internet, Web, HTTP/HTTPS Protocols
 The Internet vs. The Web
Internet: A global network of interconnected computers and devices that communicate using standardized protocols (e.g., TCP/IP). It is the infrastructure.
World Wide Web (WWW): A service that runs on the Internet. It consists of websites and web pages accessible through browsers. It uses HTTP and HTTPS to transfer information.
 HTTP & HTTPS Protocols
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol):
An application-layer protocol used to transmit hypertext (HTML) over the web.
Works on a request-response model: A client (browser) sends a request, and a server responds with the content.
Default port: 80
HTTPS (HTTP Secure):
A secure version of HTTP using SSL/TLS encryption.
Ensures confidentiality, integrity, and authentication of data.
Default port: 443
Used for secure data transfers (e.g., online banking, e-commerce).
🔹 2. Web Browsers, Servers, and Request-Response Cycle
Web Browsers
Software applications used to access, retrieve, and display content from the Web.
Examples: Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Edge, Safari
They interpret HTML, CSS, and JavaScript and display formatted content to the user.
Act as clients in the client-server model.
Web Servers
Software or hardware that serves web content (HTML pages, images, scripts) to clients.
Common servers: Apache, Nginx, IIS
Listens for requests on ports (e.g., 80, 443) and sends back appropriate responses.
The Request-Response Cycle
User enters URL in the browser.
Browser sends HTTP request to the web server.
Server processes the request and returns an HTTP response (with HTML content).
Browser renders the response and displays the web page.
Example:
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.com
Server response:
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
3. Domain Names, DNS, and Hosting
Domain Names
Human-readable names used to identify websites.
Example: www.openai.com
Easier to remember than IP addresses (e.g., 192.168.0.1)
Comprised of:
Top-Level Domain (TLD): .com, .org, .edu
Second-Level Domain: openai
Subdomain (optional): www
 DNS (Domain Name System)
Translates domain names into IP addresses.
Works like a phonebook of the Internet.
When you visit a website, DNS:
Receives the domain name.
Resolves it to the corresponding IP address.
Directs your browser to the correct server.
 Web Hosting
A service that provides storage space and access to websites on the Internet.
Hosts store:
HTML/CSS/JS files
Databases
Media assets (images, videos)
Types of hosting:
Shared Hosting: Cost-effective, resources are shared.
VPS (Virtual Private Server): More control and resources.
Dedicated Hosting: Full control over a physical server.
Cloud Hosting: Scalable, pay-as-you-go (e.g., AWS, Azure).